Unit 4
Strategic interactions and social dilemmas
Summary

Addressing the challenge of climate change requires understanding conflicting as well as common interests.
Game theory is a way of modelling economic interactions in which people behave strategically, because each person knows that the outcome depends not only on their own actions, but also on what others do.
The outcome of an interaction is a Nash equilibrium if none of those involved could do better by choosing some different action.
There may be an outcome that is not a Nash equilibrium, but in which everyone would be better off than at a Nash equilibrium. In this case, the Nash equilibrium is not Pareto efficient.
When individuals pursue higher pay-offs for themselves, the result can be worse for everyone (as in a prisoners’ dilemma game). But there are conditions in which self-interest results in the best outcome for each (as in an invisible hand game).
Experimental games with pay-offs in money often demonstrate that people care about the pay-offs that others get. In other words, their preferences are social rather than purely self-interested.
By taking account of both self-interested and social preferences, game theory can explain what we observe in experiments and in the world.
People care about fairness; in ultimatum game experiments, they are often willing to get no pay-offs at all rather than to accept what they think is an unfair division of the pie.
Opportunities to punish free-riders in the public good game, or competition in the ultimatum game, are examples of changes in the rules of the game that alter people’s behaviour.
Game theory—including the hawk–dove game—provides alternative ways of representing the challenge of climate change, and means of addressing it.
Concepts and models introduced and applied in Unit 4
Social interactions; social dilemmas
Game theory: strategic interaction, game, players, actions, pay-offs, strategies
Best response, Nash equilibrium, dominant strategy, dominant strategy equilibrium
Simultaneous games and sequential games with two or more players
Types of game: invisible hand game, prisoners’ dilemma, coordination game (such as the hawk–dove game), public good game, ultimatum game
Criteria for evaluating an allocation: Pareto criterion, Pareto efficiency, fairness
Self-interested preferences; social norms; social preferences such as altruism, inequality aversion, and reciprocity.
