Unit 7
The firm and its customers
Summary

Firms producing differentiated products choose their price and quantity of output to maximize their owners’ profits, while taking into account the product demand curve and the cost function; they set a price that is above their marginal cost of production.
Technological and cost advantages of large-scale production favour large firms.
Firms face fixed and variable costs of production, but some costs are only fixed in the short run.
The demand curve depends on consumers’ willingness to pay for the product.
The responsiveness of consumers to a price change is measured by the elasticity of demand. If a firm faces little competition, the price elasticity of its demand curve is low, and its markup of price above marginal cost is high.
The gains from trade in a market are divided between consumers and firm owners, and prices above marginal cost cause a deadweight loss for society.
Firms can increase profit by differentiating their products through product selection, innovation, and advertising, and by exploiting the advantages of large scale.
Firms with few competitors set prices strategically, taking into account the effect their own decision will have on their competitors.
Policymakers use competition policy to reduce market power and deadweight loss, and improve outcomes for society.
Concepts and models introduced and applied in Unit 7
The firm’s cost function: total costs, fixed costs, variable costs; average cost and marginal cost; the opportunity cost of capital
Costs in the short run and the long run; exogenous and endogenous variables
The demand curve for a differentiated product: willingness to pay, price elasticity of demand
Revenue and profit (or economic profit), normal profits; isoprofit curves; marginal revenue and profit margin
The scale of production: economies of scale, diseconomies of scale; increasing, constant, and decreasing returns to scale; network economies of scale
Measuring the gains from trade (or gains from exchange): total surplus, consumer surplus, and producer surplus; deadweight loss
Competition and market power: substitutes, market share; price markup, profit margin; monopoly and natural monopoly; competition policy (or antitrust policy).
