Unit 8
Supply and demand: Markets with many buyers and sellers
Summary

Prices play an important role in markets because they convey information about demand and scarcity to buyers and sellers.
In a market with many buyers and sellers, the interaction of supply and demand determines the price of the product and the quantity sold in equilibrium.
Just as the demand curve depends on the buyers’ willingness to pay, the supply curve depends on the prices that sellers are willing to accept.
When the sellers are firms, the market supply curve represents the marginal cost of production.
In the equilibrium of a market with many buyers and sellers of identical goods, no individual can influence the price: they are all price-takers. We call this a competitive equilibrium.
Price-taking behaviour ensures that all gains from trade in the market are exhausted: there is no deadweight loss.
We can use the model of supply and demand to analyse how equilibrium prices and quantities will change in response to economic shocks.
When the market is not in equilibrium, buyers and sellers adjust prices in pursuit of rents until the equilibrium is reached.
Markets that satisfy the idealized conditions under which all buyers and sellers are price-takers are described as perfectly competitive.
Real-world markets are typically not perfectly competitive, but the supply and demand model can be useful when the conditions for competitive equilibrium are only approximately satisfied.
If a government levies a tax on a product or regulates its price, the market equilibrium changes. This leads to a deadweight loss, but may enable other beneficial objectives to be achieved.
Concepts and models introduced and applied in Unit 8
The demand curve and willingness to pay for a good; the supply curve and willingness to accept (or reservation price)
Excess demand, excess supply, and the market-clearing price
The model of competitive equilibrium, in which all buyers and sellers are price-takers; the equilibrium price; Pareto efficiency; perfect competition and the Law of One Price
The firm’s supply curve (given by its marginal cost); the market supply curve and marginal cost curve; costs of entry; supply in the short run and the long run; short-run and long-run elasticities; short-run and long-run equilibria
The effects of exogenous shocks to supply and demand; disequilibrium rents and market equilibration
Taxes and price controls; tax incidence; rent ceiling
