Unit 9
Lenders and borrowers and differences in wealth
Summary

The income a person receives in a period of time may be consumed, or saved in the form of financial or physical assets, adding to their stock of wealth.
Borrowing or selling assets allows consumption spending to exceed income; this reduces the stock of wealth.
Timing matters; a person cares not only about what they get, but also when they get it. Sooner is typically better than later, which is termed impatience.
A person can rearrange the timing of their spending by borrowing, lending, investing, storing, and saving; and those with more wealth typically have more and better opportunities to do this than poorer people.
Borrowing and lending is a principal–agent relationship in which there is no contract that can guarantee for the lender (the principal) that the loan will be repaid by the borrower (the agent).
To address this problem, lenders often require borrowers to either contribute some of their own wealth to an investment project (equity) or to set aside a property to be transferred to the lender if the loan is not repaid (collateral).
People with limited wealth are unable to contribute collateral or equity and, as a result, are often unable to secure loans (except for purchasing homes or vehicles) or can only do so at higher interest rates.
While mutual gains for both borrowers and lenders motivate credit market transactions, there is a conflict of interest between them over the rate of interest, the prudent use of loaned funds, and the repayment of loans.
Investments are risky, and should things go wrong, those with limited wealth are not able to borrow on as favourable terms as the wealthy; so they avoid taking risks and as a result forgo opportunities to raise their incomes, which perpetuates wealth inequality.
Concepts and models introduced and applied in Unit 9
Wealth (stock concept): assets such as shares, equity in businesses, human capital
Income (flow concept): earnings, interest, profits
Investment, depreciation, savings, bonds
Real interest rate, nominal interest rate
Intertemporal choice model: feasible frontier, indifference curves
Bringing consumption forward to the present: borrowing, consumption smoothing, diminishing marginal utility, situational and intrinsic impatience, discount rate
Moving consumption to the future: storing, lending, investing
Principal–agent problem, incomplete contract, conflict of interest, equity, collateral, moral hazard
Inequality: wealth differences, credit market constrained, credit market excluded, Gini coefficient.
