Unit 10
Market successes and failures: The societal effects of private decisions
Summary

For a Pareto-efficient allocation of resources, the marginal social cost of production and consumption of every good must equal the marginal social benefit.
Where private and social costs or benefits differ, and decision-makers consider only their private interests, the external effects of their decisions result in misallocation (Pareto inefficiency).
For markets to allocate resources efficiently, prices must reflect marginal social costs and benefits. Market failure occurs if prices send the wrong messages, or if the relevant markets don’t exist.
If property rights are clearly established, an efficient allocation may be achieved through private bargaining. But this will not happen if, as is typically the case, transaction costs impede bargaining.
When markets and private bargaining fail, government regulation or taxation may help to overcome the problem. But there are also limitations—such as a lack of important information—on the effectiveness of government policy.
Public goods are a special case of external benefits. They are non-rival: the marginal cost of supplying an additional user is zero.
Private firms will not provide a public good efficiently. If the good is excludable, a firm may be able to provide it to fewer than the Pareto-efficient number of consumers by setting a price above marginal cost.
Shared or open-access resources are non-excludable but at least partially rival. This also leads to misallocation—that is, overuse.
When relevant information is asymmetric between the parties to an interaction (or is non-verifiable), the contract will be incomplete and the outcome inefficient, because whatever is not covered in the contract is an external effect of one party on the other.
Examples include the hidden action problem in the labour market when extra effort by the worker is an uncompensated external benefit to the employer.
Hidden attributes result in adverse selection as buyers or sellers with better attributes withdraw from the market.
Some goods and services are not allocated in markets because we agree that they are merit goods that should be available to all; or that it would be repugnant for them to be traded for money.
Concepts and models introduced and applied in Unit 10
Pareto efficiency, misallocation of resources, external effects (or externalities), market failure, and missing markets
External costs and external benefits (or equivalently external diseconomies or negative externalities, and external economies or positive externalities)
A model of misallocation when there are external costs of production (pollution); marginal social and private costs, and benefits: MSC, MPC, MSB, MPB
Marginal external costs and benefits: MEC and MEB; MSC = MPC + MEC and similarly, MSB = MPB + MEB
Legal institutions: private property, contracts, and the importance of verifiable information
Bargaining as a solution for external effects; property rights, reservation options, and transaction costs
Other solutions: regulation, Pigouvian tax (or subsidy), legal redress, and compensation
Public good, non-rivalry, free-riding; a model of misallocation in the case of a public good; excludability, deadweight loss
Excludable public goods (sometimes known as artificially scarce or club goods)
Open-access resources, common-pool resources, congestible public goods, private goods
Asymmetric information or unverifiable information, incomplete contracts, hidden-action problems, and moral hazards
Hidden attributes, adverse selection
Limitations of economic reasoning: merit goods, repugnant markets
